Feat: Gateway Upgrade Refactoring + LTS upgrade guide (#6534)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/_src/gateway/upgrade/lts-upgrade.md

specifically covering 2.8.0.0-2.8.4.1 up to 3.4.0.0.
Carefully review each entry and make changes to your configuration accordingly.

There are three upgrade strategies available for the LTS to LTS upgrade. 
This guide nominates the best applicable strategy for each deployment mode that {{site.base_gateway}} supports. 
Additionally, it lists some fundamental factors that play important roles in the upgrade process, and explains how to back up and recover data.

This guide uses the following terms in the context of {{site.base_gateway}}:
* **Upgrade**: The overall process of switching from an older to a newer version of {{site.base_gateway}}. 
* **Migration**: The migration of your data store data into a new environment. 
For example, the process of moving 2.8 data from an old PostgreSQL instance to a new one for 3.4 is referred to as database migration.

To make sure your upgrade is successful, carefully review all the steps in this guide. It’s very important to understand all the preparation steps and choose the recommended upgrade path based on your deployment type.

{:.important}

> > **Caution**: The migration pattern described in this document can only happen between two LTS versions, {{site.ee_product_name}} 2.8 LTS and {{site.ee_product_name}} 3.4 LTS. If you apply this document to other release intervals, database modifications may be run in the wrong sequence and leave the database schema in a broken state. To migrate between other versions, see the [general upgrade guide](/gateway/{{page.kong_version}}/upgrade/) for your target version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Caution**: The migration pattern described in this document can only happen between two LTS versions, {{site.ee_product_name}} 2.8 LTS and {{site.ee_product_name}} 3.4 LTS. If you apply this document to other release intervals, database modifications may be run in the wrong sequence and leave the database schema in a broken state. To migrate between other versions, see the [general upgrade guide](/gateway/{{page.kong_version}}/upgrade/).
```

6. **Complete switchover**: Once you are confident that the upgraded cluster is fully functional and stable, you can redirect all incoming traffic to the new cluster. This step completes the upgrade process and decommissions the old cluster.

By following this dual cluster deployment strategy, you can achieve a smooth and zero-downtime upgrade from one LTS version of {{site.base_gateway}} to another. This approach helps ensure high availability and uninterrupted service for your users throughout the upgrade process.

#### In-place upgrade

While an [in-place upgrade](/gateway/{{page.kong_version}}/upgrade/dual-cluster/) allows you to perform the upgrade on the same infrastructure, 
it does require some downtime during the actual upgrade process.
Plan a suitable maintenance or downtime window during which you can perform the upgrade.
During this period, the {{site.base_gateway}} will be temporarily unavailable.

> For scenarios where zero downtime is critical, consider the dual-cluster upgrade method, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For scenarios where zero downtime is critical, consider the [dual-cluster upgrade](#dual-cluster-upgrade) method, 
```

{:.important}
> **Caution**: The migration pattern described in this document can only happen between two LTS versions, {{site.ee_product_name}} 2.8 LTS and {{site.ee_product_name}} 3.4 LTS. If you apply this document to other release intervals, database modifications may be run in the wrong sequence and leave the database schema in a broken state. To migrate between other versions, see the [general upgrade guide](/gateway/{{page.kong_version}}/upgrade/) for your target version.

## Prerequisites

* Starting from 3.4, Cassandra is not supported. 
If you are using Cassandra as your data store, migrate off of Cassandra first and upgrade second.
* [Review KIC upgrade compatibility](/kubernetes-ingress-controller/latest/guides/upgrade-kong-3x/)
* decK upgrade compatibility? <!-- where is this? -->

Read this document thoroughly to successfully complete the upgrade process, as it includes all the necessary operational knowledge for the upgrade.

## Upgrade journey overview

**Preparation phase**

> There are a number of steps you must complete before upgrading to Kong 3.4.x.x LTS:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are a number of steps you must complete before upgrading to {{site.base_gateway}} 3.4.x.x LTS:
```

1. Work through any listed prerequistes.
1. Back up your database (if applicable), or your declarative configuration files.
1. Choose the right strategy for upgrading based on your deployment topology.

> 1. Review the gateway changes from 2.8 to 3.4 for any breaking changes that affect your deployments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Review the {{site.base_gateway}} changes from 2.8 to 3.4 for any breaking changes that affect your deployments.
```

1. Conduct a thorough examination of the modifications made to the `kong.conf` file between the LTS releases.
1. Using your chosen strategy, test migration in a pre-production environment.

**Performing the upgrade**

> The actual execution of the migration is dependent on the type of deployment you have with Kong. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The actual execution of the migration is dependent on the type of deployment you have with {{site.base_gateway}}. 
```

Review the [Backup and Restore](/gateway/{{page.kong_version}}/upgrade/backup-and-restore/) guide to prepare backups of your configuration. If you run into any issues and need to roll back, you can also reference that guide to restore your old data store.

## Preparation: Choosing an upgrade strategy

Upgrade strategies introduced in this section are generic and may or may not fit in with your deployment environment. 

Choose your deployment mode:
* [Traditional](#traditional-mode)
* [Hybrid](#hybrid-mode)
* [DB-less](#db-less-mode)

Here's a flow chart the summarizes how the decision process works:

![Choosing a strategy based on the deployment mode](/assets/images/products/gateway/upgrade/choose-your-deployment.png)
> _Figure 1: Choosing an upgrade strategy based on deployment type_

See the following sections for breakdowns of each strategy.

### Traditional mode

A traditional mode deployment is when all {{site.base_gateway}} components are running in one environment, and there is no control plane/data plane separation.

You have two options when upgrading {{site.base_gateway}} in traditional mode:

> * **Dual-cluster upgrade**: A new Kong cluster of version Y is deployed alongside the current version X, so that two clusters serve requests concurrently during the upgrade process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Dual-cluster upgrade**: A new {{site.base_gateway}} cluster of version Y is deployed alongside the current version X, so that two clusters serve requests concurrently during the upgrade process.
```

* **In-place upgrade**: Similar to, but unlike the dual-cluster upgrade strategy, an in-place upgrade reuses the existing database and has to shut down the cluster X first, then configure the new cluster Y to point to the database.

We recommend using a dual cluster upgrade if the resources are available.

#### Dual-cluster upgrade

> Upgrading a Kong API Gateway from one LTS version to another LTS version with zero downtime can be achieved through a dual-cluster deployment strategy. This approach involves setting up a new cluster running the upgraded version of Kong alongside the existing cluster running the current version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Upgrading a Kong API Gateway from one LTS version to another LTS version with zero downtime can be achieved through a dual-cluster deployment strategy. This approach involves setting up a new cluster running the upgraded version of {{site.base_gateway}} alongside the existing cluster running the current version.
```

6. **Complete switchover**: Once you are confident that the upgraded cluster is fully functional and stable, you can redirect all incoming traffic to the new cluster. This step completes the upgrade process and decommissions the old cluster.

By following this dual cluster deployment strategy, you can achieve a smooth and zero-downtime upgrade from one LTS version of Kong to another. This approach helps ensure high availability and uninterrupted service for your users throughout the upgrade process.

#### In-place upgrade

Plan a suitable maintenance or downtime window during which you can perform the upgrade. During this period, the {{site.base_gateway}} will be temporarily unavailable.

While an in-place upgrade deployment allows you to perform the upgrade on the same infrastructure, it does require some downtime during the actual upgrade process. 

For scenarios where zero downtime is critical, you would need to consider the dual cluster deployment method mentioned earlier, but that would involve additional resources and complexities.

### DB-less mode

> DB-less mode is special in that each independent Kong node loads a copy of Kong configuration data into memory, without persistent database storage, so failure of some nodes will not spread to others.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
DB-less mode is special in that each independent Kong node loads a copy of Kong configuration data into memory, without persistent database storage, so if some nodes fail it will not spread to others.
```

Therefore, the recommended upgrade process is a combination of different upgrade strategies for each type of node, CP or DP.

The major challenge with a hybrid mode upgrade is the communication between CP and DP.

In hybrid mode, the CP can't be running a version of Kong that is older than the versions of the DPs. For 
this reason, you must upgrade your CPs first, and then the DPs. With this method, there is no business downtime.

See the upgrade workflow in the following diagram.

![Upgrading a hybrid mode deployment](/assets/images/products/gateway/upgrade/hybrid-mode-upgrade.png)
> _Figure 2: Upgrading a hybrid mode deployment using a dual-cluster or in-place strategy for control planes,_
_followed by a rolling upgrade strategy for data planes_.

1. First, upgrade the CP according to the recommendations in the section [Traditional Mode](#traditional-mode), while DP nodes are still serving API requests.
2. Next, upgrade DP nodes using the recommendations from the section [DB-less Mode](#db-less-mode). 
Point the new DP nodes to the new CP to avoid version conflicts.

> ## Preparation: Review gateway changes

Reviewer 2: I wonder if it would be better to move these to the breaking changes section as a 2.8 LTS to 3.4 LTS breaking changes page of its own. That would be consistent with the other pages.

Reviewer 2: For the "Notifications of changed behavior" subsection, can we just tell them to read the release notes especially if this is just for awareness and not for actionable steps? Just trying to avoid duplicate content/too much content on one page.

Author: > I wonder if it would be better to move these to the breaking changes section as a 2.8 LTS to 3.4 LTS breaking changes page of its own. That would be consistent with the other pages.

I would be fine with this, not sure how it would go over though. Let's try it out.

> For the "Notifications of changed behavior" subsection, can we just tell them to read the release notes especially if this is just for awareness and not for actionable steps? Just trying to avoid duplicate content/too much content on one page.

Unfortunately no, for the same reason that I put for your previous comment - the goal of the LTS guide is to consolidate all the info they might need, and reading through the changelog is far more difficult.
